
# Meditation on emptiness (retreat): Opening talk, Orienting and relating to the emptiness retreat

## Beginning of the teaching


For me, this is really, really, I feel, very much a privilege for me to be able to offer these teachings, and I know John feels the same. It's very beautiful. For me, it's a very beautiful experience. It's beautiful to see so many people here, and that this inspires and calls you and attracts you, to me, is very touching. These teachings of emptiness, I think it's fair to say they're really at the heart of what the Buddha was teaching. They're really at the heart of the Buddha's path. They're at the heart of his awakening. Very much at the heart, the pith, the core of what he awakened to -- it was emptiness. And then his teaching, in a way -- it's not obvious at first, but it was all centred around emptiness. We can say 'emptiness' and 'dependent origination' -- we'll be talking about these two -- they're two sides of the same coin. But he actually said, > "First there is the understanding. First there is the realization of emptiness or dependent > origination, and then there is nibbāna."[^footnote_1]

They follow one from another very naturally. He was very clear about that. Without that, there isn't awakening, there isn't nibbāna. And so we say, "What did he wake up to?" He woke up to emptiness. He woke up to dependent origination.

Sometimes (and understandably), people can feel, or we can have a sense that these teachings of emptiness, or the meditations on emptiness, they're sort of the pinnacle of the teachings. They're like the cream or something, or it's a bit elitist or specialist: "Well, I might get into that, or I might not." And to a certain extent, that's true. But in another way, these teachings of emptiness actually permeate the whole of the Dharma, but it's not in a very obvious way. They permeate every teaching and every aspect that the Buddha ever talked about. So when we talk about generosity, when we talk about ethics, they actually have a lot to do with emptiness. It's not obvious at first, but the more one goes into this, the more one actually sees it's all kind of different strands, different facets of one teaching. Why is that? When I practise generosity, when I care about my ethics, something is getting unbound. We could say the tendency of the mind and the heart to grip something, to bind something -- me, worrying about me, concerned about me, and putting that first -- starts to get unbound. And that starts to have an effect. We can go very deep into emptiness through generosity, and also through caring about ethics.

We start to see something: that we build, we shape the world that we live in. We're going to talk a lot about this. I'll just say a tiny bit tonight. That actually ends up being part of the real core of what the emptiness message is: the world that we experience, the world that we perceive, that we feel to be what we naturally exist in, that's actually shaped by the heart and the qualities in the heart. And that's why generosity and ethics and all the rest of those teachings actually have a lot to do with emptiness.

That's actually all I'm going to talk about emptiness, per se, tonight. What I really want to talk about tonight is how to relate to this retreat and how to relate to these teachings, just a little bit, and it's something we'll revisit. So I'm kind of wondering how you're feeling, how you're feeling tonight. Maybe you're just tired, and I know some have had a very long way to get here -- coming from California, etc. So you might be feeling tired. I hope if you're tired you can find some energy, because I feel like I have quite a lot I want to communicate. So I hope some energy can be roused. But other than just tired, if you are tired, sometimes people are really excited. There's something about these teachings, and they actually feel, and people have said to me, "I feel excited. I'm really looking forward." I love it when people feel excited about practice. I really enjoy that, and I think it's important that we do feel excited about the practice at times.

But equally, there might be -- and I would expect it -- some ambivalence. Some people feel maybe daunted -- maybe by the length of the retreat; maybe by the theme. And so this is a little bit what I want to go into. So tonight I want to talk about certainly some information and general stuff, but also about this relationship with the whole retreat. So what I'm saying tonight -- sometimes opening talks, you know, people are tired, and we just sort of say "hi," and kind of set a certain tone, and then "see you tomorrow, good night." So I'm hoping that what I say tonight you will remember, because it might not feel that important right now. Some people are doing this retreat for the second time. They did it last year. And they will recognize a lot of what I'm talking about, and actually it's quite important. So I hope that you can remember this over the retreat, which is four weeks, which is quite a long time to try and remember it. I'm actually not expecting you to remember it, but [laughs] saying it's quite important.

[8:03] So being on retreat is a challenge, and I'm sure many of you know that. It's challenging in different ways. This retreat has its own particular challenges as well as the usual challenges. It's actually quite challenging to teach. It's a very challenging retreat to teach. Part of what's challenging is that there's an enormous amount that we're communicating. It's going to feel like really a lot of material and a lot of possible approaches offered. There's a reason for that. I'm sure there are other ways to go about this, but this is what we've chosen. It's because everyone in here is different, and everyone in here has different practice backgrounds, and different histories, and different personalities, and different inclinations, etc. So everyone in here will probably be approaching this whole area quite differently. The idea is to kind of offer loads, and people find different bits to nibble on, and to follow different strands. I think at the beginning last year, I said it's a bit like a giant pizza, and it's in the room, and people will be starting to nibble from different directions. That's not a very good analogy. [laughter] Ultimately, everyone eats a whole pizza. Everyone eats the whole pizza, ultimately, in the end.

It's impossible to communicate everything at once. In other words, we'll be moving through -- obviously the teachings have to get communicated in time, so this, and then that, and then this, and then that. It may be that the order that the teachings get presented in is exactly the order that follows, and exactly at the right time that you feel it progresses exactly with your internal process. Hallelujah if it is. But it's probably not going to be that. It's probably going to feel like you're storing some stuff, and just leaving some stuff, and following other threads, etc. And that's all really, really fine. It's completely fine. Eventually, it will all fit together for you. And as I said, it's impossible to say it all at once. Sometimes one wishes that one can kind of say everything at once, and actually repeat this opening talk every day, but obviously it's impossible.

So did everyone get the message about the notebooks? I see lots of notebooks. Did everyone get that? Yeah? So this really isn't a study retreat. If study isn't your thing, don't be nervous. It's really not a study retreat, but there's, as I said, an enormous amount of teachings offered, an enormous amount of approaches, things to reflect on, subtleties, etc. And really that's what we want to do, John and I, is communicate something, give you something of the fullness of these teachings, the subtlety, the depth -- give you all of that, and the precision. There's a lot of real precision here, as well, rather than kind of having a practice that might be a little vague. So it's sometimes sad when people are left with a bit of a vague sense of what to do or how to go about practice. What we want is to really give you the know-how, how to practise in this area, and really practise well, and really know how to practise well. That's my hope.

So sometimes I think it would be better if this retreat was four months long, or actually four years long. There's a ton here. And it's okay. It's really okay. No one is going to get to all of what's being offered in four weeks. Well, I'm not saying it's impossible, but it would be very, very unlikely that anyone would get to all of it. Rather, what I'm hoping, as I sort of alluded to before, is that in everything that's offered, in the practices and approaches that are offered, each person finds one or two or maybe three approaches that work for you individually, and then you follow that. You follow strands, avenues of practice, and you develop that. They're going to be different for different people. So maybe one, or maybe a couple. But the key thing is finding what works, and then developing that, and taking it deeper, and seeing where it goes, rather than trying to do everything. But we do want to give, as I said, some sense of the width of the possible approaches, and where we're heading with all this, where all these teachings on emptiness are going -- some sense of that.

So again, what I really hope for, what I really wish to communicate and to offer and to give, is that you, on this retreat, learn new ways, new approaches, something that you haven't been able to do before -- that you learn how to do that; that you acquire a new skill, a new art, a new tool in meditation that works for you. And by 'working' for you, I mean you really sense that you can feel the freedom coming out of it. You feel, "I have some sense of how to do this, and I know that when I do it, I can actually feel the freedom." That's what we would wish for. So it's finding what works, experimenting for yourself.

I've seen many, many times, over the years of teaching, there are people grappling, feeling like nothing is working, nothing is working, and eventually finding something, and being surprised with what comes with that. So I sometimes see meditation as a kind of art. It's an art and a craft, and we develop skills, we develop that art, and we really can do that. Partly what I want to communicate tonight is that really that is possible. You can do that. We can do that. So sometimes, as I said, it will feel a little bit daunting, or "I don't understand," or overwhelming, but we really can do this. I know it. Everyone can pick up something, find something that works here.

One of the sad things for me teaching sometimes is that -- I don't know proportions, but sometimes it seems to me that the majority of meditators actually grossly underestimate what they are personally capable of, what's actually possible for them. And because of that, they don't actually venture out and experiment with things. They don't even try to play and experiment with things. They just feel like, "I couldn't possibly do that." I have a real sense that it's a matter of finding one's way of working, as I said. Much, much more is possible for us as meditators than we tend to think -- much, much more.

[15:20] On this retreat -- it's only open to experienced meditators -- we're kind of presupposing a little bit that you are familiar with basic sort of mindfulness practice, and what it means to be mindful, what it means to pay attention to your experience and the different aspects and dimensions of your experience. We're kind of presupposing that, and presupposing that you feel able to be with your experience in that direct, mindful way, and open to it, and work with it like that. So that's a kind of presupposition. However, being realistic, it's true to say that maybe most people need more practice with that. You know, just that practice sounds simple, but as many of you know, it actually takes quite a while to really absorb that into one's meditative life, and really feel like, "I really feel comfortable knowing how to do that. I really feel comfortable with that sort of basic mindfulness and openness and ability to be with." For most people it takes years. It takes years to develop the capacity to do that and to feel really comfortable doing that.

So, though we are kind of presupposing it, it's something that we can still talk about. It's very much something that we can talk about, and sometimes we will talk just in those terms. And you can bring that level of things to interviews, and please do. But I guess what I'm asking is: don't just do that. Please, please, please, don't just do that. If you're familiar with just being mindful of your experience, don't just do that. And don't assume, as I was saying, that emptiness meditations are all difficult. They're not all difficult. Some of them may be very subtle. So you might have a kind of normal practice of just opening to things and being with things. It's fine sometimes. But see if you can really add to that, and build on that, and go beyond that.

So to do that, to learn new practices, to open into realms of practice that we're not familiar with, for me, takes playing with. It's kind of a willingness to play with our practice, like a child playing with toys, and actually have fun with it, and experiment, and allow ourselves to be flexible that way. And then finding what works and consolidating that -- actually really absorbing that and making it more solid. You'll get lots of different opinions on this, but I really feel that it's highly, highly unlikely that someone 'just being with' their experience would stumble on the full depth and range and potency of the teachings on emptiness. It's an opinion, but I guess I hold that opinion, that it's unlikely that just being with the experience would open up that whole depth. It seems to me that we actually need to be a bit more directive in the practice, a bit more experimental, a bit more playing, listen to teachings, etc., and develop, as I said, specific approaches. So finding what works, playing, really playing with it, and then repeating, repeating that, following that avenue, taking it deeper, burrowing with that and seeing where it goes.

As I said before, every retreat (not for everyone, but for a lot of people) brings up all the usual retreat difficulties -- just stuff, whether it's about sleep, or about your work period job, or about where we sit, or the temperature of the room, or something about your shoes, or whatever it is. It's just normal stuff of retreat life. And again, I'm really hoping that you can remember all this for the whole four weeks, but I'm really hoping that what we're talking about in terms of formal practice actually gets transferred to all that other stuff, in terms of as we move around. Can I bring the same contemplations of emptiness, the same ways of looking, the same kind of ways of seeing things to all that difficulty too?

Okay. I think I mentioned before, but some people, and some people in this room, I'm sure, the idea of coming on a four-week retreat on emptiness, or even just the word 'emptiness,' it brings a welling up of joy and excitement and a kind of "yippee!" inside. Some people, that's what's there for them. They're probably in the minority, if that's the case. Probably in the minority. Most people have some ambivalence in relationship to teachings on emptiness, some degree of ambivalence. You may even be aware of some inside of you right now, or if you're not, it probably will come up at some point in the retreat. I can think, certainly from last year, and just over the years teaching this stuff, usually it's challenging, and it usually rocks the boat either a little bit or quite a lot. Even last year, people get quite angry. Some people get quite angry -- angry at me, angry at John, angry at Gaia House, angry at the teachings, angry at the Buddha. [laughter] It's not that uncommon. Another very common reaction is fear, fear around the teachings of emptiness, and fear around the experience of emptiness, and fear around the whole thing. And again, some people don't approach the teacher, or approach a certain amount and then go away because of that fear. There are different flavours of the fear, etc. Very, very common. Not 100 per cent, but for most people, it will bring up some degree of fear, in some way or another, at some point.

I don't know if this will help, but there's nothing to fear. There's really nothing to fear. We'll talk more about this, I'm sure, in the interactions, and the talks, and the questions and answers and things. But there's really nothing to fear. It's actually moving in the opposite direction of fear and everything that goes with fear. But for most people, these teachings on emptiness, and moving in the practice of emptiness, and getting deeper is actually quite a gradual process, and not necessarily linear. And even the -- what could we say? -- the meditative experiences of emptiness, to whatever degree (a little bit, a lot, whatever), are kind of an acquired taste for most people. We're not quite sure, and we're just getting used to something that's a bit unfamiliar. All of that's very, very normal.

I could be wrong, but certainly if last year or other occasions and situations where I've taught this kind of thing (which is quite a lot) ... it could be that at times you feel very frustrated with the teachings, with everything. They're difficult to understand. I'll start probably tomorrow -- there's something about emptiness that's not difficult to understand at all, actually. It's so obvious, at one level, or levels of emptiness are so obvious. They're so kind of commonsensical. We're going to start there. And there are levels that are so counterintuitive and so mind-blowing and mind-boggling, and we've got all of that. They're difficult-to-understand teachings. To me, it takes time. It takes patience. And there can be at times some frustration. There can be at times some agitation with all of this. We hear something, and we wrestle, and we don't understand, or we don't like how it sounds, and the heart gets agitated. I, for one, have and I still do wrestle with different -- in the past, and wrestling with these teachings, and feeling agitated by them. And that's all, in a way, quite normal, and not necessarily a bad thing. It's part of the deepening process. It's part of the opening process.

This is going to sound funny, but I kind of feel like I would like to ask you to really keep an open mind, to try and keep that through four weeks. That sounds like a very funny thing to ask on retreat, because obviously we mostly show up on retreat with a very open mind. But again, experience from last year, etc., shows that, in different ways, we can struggle with a lot of what's being offered, and a lot of the teachings, and a lot of the concepts, and even the practice. So really asking to just keep checking the openness of the mind, the openness of the heart.

Some of the teachings and approaches -- some; I'm not sure what percentage, but some -- will be very non-conceptual, very sort of direct and simple. And some will be actually very conceptual. They will involve a lot of the thinking mind, the rational mind going into things and using the intellectual capacity to sort of address these whole questions. They're part of what's being offered. Different people will pick up different things. Different people will be helped by different approaches. So again, that's something that may be challenging at different times, but I hope that's okay, and it feels important.

So open-mindedness, and, I also feel, humility. Again, that sounds like a funny thing to be bringing up at the beginning of a retreat, or asking you for. I feel, for many years, this has been a real central avenue of my practice, these teachings on emptiness and the whole area of emptiness, and I feel very, very humble still around all the teachings. You know, there's stuff that I still feel I don't really understand it; I'm not sure. But it's a sense of just keeping that sense [of humility]. As I said, a lot of the teachings are counterintuitive. The teachings of emptiness actually counter our general sense and intuition of reality. It's actually in the opposite direction of that. So to me, it takes humility. Sometimes, as I said, very difficult to understand, and there are levels and depths. Even if we feel like, "Oh, I understand that. I understand that. It keeps going. Great, great, great," haven't reached the end yet. Haven't reached the end. I don't know. It keeps going. It seems to just keep going. For myself, it seems to just keep going. And to me, there's something beautiful about the necessity of humility there.

There's a teacher, Āryadeva. We'll talk about him. He's a very important teacher, four or five hundred years after the Buddha. He's talking about this open-mindedness:

> Those with little merit do not even entertain questions regarding this Dharma [these teachings of emptiness].[^footnote_2]

They don't even entertain questions about it. It's a closed door.

> Even entertaining a question about it tears saṃsāra to shreds.[^footnote_2]

Then he says,

> When one sees reality [in other words, emptiness] one achieves a supreme abode.[^footnote_2]

But this is the important bit:

> Even by seeing the slightest bit, one is better off.[^footnote_2]

It's a very gradual teaching here. There's a spectrum.

> Therefore the wise should always cultivate such wisdom in contemplating phenomena.[^footnote_2]

A lot of this, or some of this, some of what's being offered, will be like planting seeds. In other words, you will feel the fruit of a lot of it in these four weeks. I really hope that. And some, it may be that seeds sprout a couple of weeks later. It may be years later. It may be something you've completely forgotten about, but it will manifest later.

[^footnote_1]: SN 12:70 ([Saṁyutta Nikāya (connected discourses on causation), Susimaparibbājakasutta](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.70/en/bodhi)).

[^footnote_2]: This appears to be Rob's own translation of verses 180 and 196 from Āryadeva's Catuḥśataka. Part of this quotation is cited as a "Translation from the author's notes" in Rob Burbea, Seeing That Frees (Devon: Hermes Amāra, 2014), 8 n. 7. Cf. Āryadeva, Gyel-Tsap, and Geshe Sonam Rinchen, Āryadeva's Four Hundred Stanzas on the Middle Way: With Commentary by Gyel-Tsap, traduction Ruth Sonam (Ithaca, New York: Snow Lion Publications, 2008), 188, 197.
